.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH MOCAC 1 "$the_short_local_date"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
.B mocac
\-\- a generator of construction functions for Caml relational types
.UR http://moca.inria.fr/
(http://moca.inria.fr/).

.SH VERSION
Mocac version $mocac_version
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mocac
.RI [ options ]\ [ source\ file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B mocac
compiler is a Caml source file generator. It parses a special ".mlm"
or ".mlms" file and produces a regular Caml module (interface + implementation).
The ".mlm(s)" file is similar to a Caml ".mli" file: it must define a
(private) type with possibly the addition of special annotations to
specify the relations that the constructors must verify.
.B mocac
then generates construction functions for the constructors, such that
all the specified relations hold for the values of the type defined.
.P
In addition to declarative algebraic properties specification,
.B mocac
offers the generation of construction functions that ensure maximal
sharing of values, by giving a ".mlms" input file or by using the
.I \-\-sharing
switch.
.P
Last but not least, the construction functions may be made memo, if option
.I \-\-memo
is set  (see
.B OPTIONS
below).

.SH CURRENTLY SUPPORTED FEATURES:
\- Associative, commutative binary relations.

\- Inverse relations.

\- Absorbent, absorbing, or neutral elements.

\- Idempotent, nilpotent, distributive, involutive unary and binary
relations.

\- General rewrite rules.

\- Maximal sharing of values built.

\- Memoization of construction functions.

\- Listary relations (variable arity).

\- User-defined comparison function for commutative relations.

.SH EXPERIMENTAL FEATURES:

\- Completion of theories

\- Automatic term generation for testing purposes

.SH SYNTAX ADDITIONS TO TYPE DEFINITIONS

To specify  relations on constructors,
.B mocac
adds some extra syntax rules to the  grammar of type definitions.


.TS
tab(@);
l c l.
constr-decl @::=@ constr-name [ annotation ]
@|@ constr-name of typexpr [ annotation ]

annotation @::=@ begin
           @   @ { relation | completion_hint }+
           @   @ end

relation @::=@
@|@ commutative [(compare)]
@|@ associative
@|@ involutive
@|@ idempotent [side]
@|@ neutral [side] (constr-name)
@|@ nilpotent (constr-name)
@|@ invopp [side] (constr-name [, constr-name])
@|@ distributive [invopp] [side]
@ @ (constr-name [, constr_name])
@|@ absorbent [side] (constr-name)
@|@ absorbing [side] (constr-name)
@|@ rule pattern\ ->\ expression

side @::=@\ left\ |\ right

invopp @::=@\ inverse\ |\ opposite

rpo_status @::=@\ lexicographic\ |\ multiset

completion_hint @::=@
@|@ completion precedence int
@|@ completion status rpo_status

.TE

.P
The
.I compare
construction refers to the name of a user-defined comparison function.
This comparison function can be defined in any of the constructors of the
variant type (but must be defined in one).

.P
Additional completion hints can be given to define a precedence over the
generators when using lpo, mpo or rpo. A status -- lexicographic or multiset --
can also be given when using rpo.

.SH MEANING OF ALGEBRAIC PROPERTIES OF CONSTRUCTORS

The declaration of a constructor
.B C
may be annotated by one or more algebraic properties among the one below.

.P
The basic properties are as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR commutative\ [(compare)]
@ C (x, y) = C (y, x)
@ If a value matches C (x, y), we have compare x y < 0,
@ where compare is Pervasives.compare
@ or the comparison function specified.
.IR associative
@ C (C (x, y), z) = C (x, C (y, z))
@ No value matches C (C (x, y), z).
.IR involutive
@ C (C (x)) = x
@ No value matches C (C (x)).
.TE

.P
The neutral, nilpotent and idempotent properties are as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR neutral\ (D)
@ neutral\ left\ (D) and neutral\ right\ (D).
.IR neutral\ left\ (D)
@ C (D, x) = x
@ No value matches C (D, x).
.IR neutral\ right\ (D)
@ C (x, D) = x
@ No value matches C (x, D).
.IR nilpotent\ (A)
@ nilpotent\ left\ (A) and nilpotent\ right\ (A).
.IR nilpotent\ left\ (A)
@ C (x, C (x, y)) = A
@ No value matches C (x, C (x, y)).
.IR nilpotent\ right\ (A)
@ C (C (x, y), y) = A
@ No value matches C (C (x, y), y).
.IR idempotent
@ idempotent\ left and idempotent\ right.
.IR idempotent\ left
@ C (x, C (x, y)) = C (x, y)
@ No value matches C (x, C (x, y)).
.IR idempotent\ right
@ C (C (x, y), y) = C (x, y)
@ No value matches C (C (x, y), y).
.TE

.P
The inverse and opposite properties are as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR inverse\ (I,\ E)
@ inverse\ left\ (I,\ E) and inverse\ right\ (I,\ E).
.IR inverse\ left\ (I,\ E)
@ C (I (x),\ x) = E
@ No value matches C (I (x), x).
.IR inverse\ right\ (I,\ E)
@ C (x,\ I (x)) = E
@ No value matches C (x, I (x)).
.IR Note:\ If\ C\ is\ neutral\ [side]\ (E),\ then
@ inverse [side'] (I) is equivalent to inverse [side'] (I, E).
.TE

.P
The distributivity properties are as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR distributive\ (D,\ E)
@ distributive\ left\ (D,\ E) and distributive\ right\ (D,\ E).
.IR distributive\ (D)
@ distributive\ (D,\ D)
.IR distributive\ left\ (D,\ E)
@ C (D (x1,\ ...,\ xn),\ z) = E (C (x1,\ z),\ ...,\ C (xn,\ z))
@ No value matches C (D (x1,\ ...,\ xn), z).
.IR distributive\ right\ (D,\ E)
@ C (z,\ D (x1,\ ...,\ xn)) = E (C (z,\ x1),\ ...,\ C (z,\ xn))
@ No value matches C (z, D (x1, ..., xn)).
.IR distributive\ inverse\ left\ (D,\ E)
@ C (D (x1,\ ...,\ xn),\ z) = E (C (xn,\ z),\ ...,\ C (x1,\ z))
@ No value matches C (D (x1,\ ...,\ xn), z).
.TE

.P
The absorbing and absorbent properties are as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR absorbent\ (A)
@ absorbent left\ (A) and absorbent right (A) (A, x) = A.
.IR absorbent\ left\ (A)
@ C (A, x) = A
@ No value matches C (A, x).
.IR absorbent\ right\ (A)
@ C (x, A) = A
@ No value matches C (x, A).
.IR absorbing\ (D)
@ absorbing left (D) and absorbing right (D).
.IR absorbing\ left\ (D)
@ C (D (x, y), y) = y
@ No value matches C (D (x, y), y).
.IR absorbing\ right\ (D)
@ C (x, D (x, y)) = x
@ No value matches C (x, D (x, y)).
.TE

.P
User-defined rewrite rules are as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR rule\ pat\ ->\ expr
@ C (pat) = expr
@ No value matches C (pat).
.TE

.P
Completion hints can be given as follows:
.TS
tab (@);
l l.
.IR completion\ status\ s
@ s can be lexicographic or multiset.
@ s is the RPO status of the generator.
.IR completion\ precedence\ i
@ i is an integer.
@ The integers define the precedence on generator symbols.
.TE

.SH OPTIONS
The following command-line options are recognized by
.B mocac
:
.TP
.B \-c
Generate a module for the input file argument.
.TP
.B \-d
Debugging mode: generate a trace of pattern matching clauses used in construction functions.
.TP
.B \-help | \-\-help
Display the list of options.
.TP
.B \-i
Generate a module interface for the input file argument
.TP
.B \-kb
Set completion on (experimental).
.TP
.BI \-limit\ <n>
Set an upper bound  <n> to completion steps..
.TP
.BI \-ntests\ <n>
Set the number of generated tests per equation (use with the
.B -test
option).
.TP
.BI \-I\ <dir>
Add the directory <dir> to the search path.
.TP
.BI \-o\ <file>
Output the generated module with name the file name argument.
.TP
.BI \-oml\ <file>
Output the generated module implementation in the file argument.
.TP
.BI \-omli\ <file>
Output the generated module interface in the file argument.
.TP
.BI \-seed\ <n>
Sets seed number to <n> for random test generation.
.TP
.B \-\-sharing
Add maximal sharing to the values built by the construction functions.
.br This is the same as giving a ".mlms" input file.
.TP
.B \-\-memo
Equip the construction functions with a so-called memoization table,
so that the function remembers the argument \-\> result mapping:
the image of any argument is only computed once and for all.
.TP
.B \-test
Generate a file to test the code generated by
.B mocac
(experimental).
.TP
.B \-urorder
Relations code generation for normalization is made as given in the source file.
.TP
.B \-v
Print
.B mocac
version string.
.TP
.BI \-valdepth\ <n>
Set the maximal constructor depth of the values generated for testing (use with the
.B -test
option).
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Be verbose.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print
.B mocac
long version string.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.BI mocac\ \-\-sharing\ filename
.B mocac
generates a module for
.I filename
and the associated construction functions ensure maximal sharing between the
values of the private type defined in
.IR filename  .

.TP
.BI mocac\ filename
generates a module for
.IR filename  .

.SH FULL EXAMPLE

If
.I group.mlm
contains the following (private) type definition with
.B mocac
annotations:
.P
<!--#include virtual="Includes/group.mlm"-->
.P
Then the command
.B mocac
.I group.mlm
generates the module interface file
.I group.mli
containing:
.P
<!--#include virtual="Includes/group.mli"-->
.P
.B mocac
also generates the module implementation file
.I group.ml
with the proper definitions for the construction functions declared in
.IR group.mli  :
.P
<!--#include virtual="Includes/group.ml"-->
.P
Now the values of type
.I Group.t
can (only) be built using the construction functions defined in
.IR group.ml
\.
For instance, the value
.P
.I z
= add (one, add (zero, opp one))
.P
is a valid value of type
.IR t.
.P
Thanks to the declared properties of the constructors of type
.IR t,
and due to the corresponding semantics of the construction functions,
the value
.I z
is indeed bound to
.IR Zero.

.SH NOTES
.P
It is highly recommended that source files for
.B mocac
only contain relational type definitions.
Although
.B mocac
allows arbitrary Caml code in .mlm(s) files,
mixing relational type definitions and ordinary Caml code is considered
bad practice, since it is usually extremely confusing.

.P
Completion is as of now highly experimental and relatively slow. It
is a straightforward implementation of syntactic completion. In
particular, it does not handle completion modulo AC.

.SH COPYRIGHT
This program is distributed under the artistic license found in the
LICENSE file in the root directory of the distribution.
.SH SEE ALSO
The
.B mocac
user's manual (http://moca.inria.fr/eng.htm)
(French version at http://moca.inria.fr/fra.htm).
.SH AUTHORS
Pierre Weis <Pierre.Weis@inria.fr>,
.br
Frédéric Blanqui <Frederic.Blanqui@inria.fr>
.P
This manual page was written by Pierre Weis and revised by Richard Bonichon
and Pierre Weis for
.B mocac
version $mocac_version.
.P
Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique
($(software_first_year)-$(this_year))
